Chapter on "Thinking"
from "The Zen Environment" 
by Marian Mountain,
pp. 89-93.
In the middle of typing over a paragraph for the third time (but not the
last), I hear the soft trickling nesting call of a canyon wren.  Whenever
I hear the song of this shy bird, it takes me back to Tassajara.  Once
again I find myself sitting on my round black cushion in the zendo,
surrounded by black-robed monks.  Through the open windows I can hear the
murmur of Tassajara Creek, and nearby the sounds of the kitchen crew making
breakfast.  It's almost the end of the second period of zazen, when, from the
top of the zendo roof, the canyon wren pours out a shower of pure liquid
notes that splash over sleepy bald heads and wake everyone up to the
wonder of this fantastic world of ours.  Though I've never heard them,
I'm sure that the songs of the nightingale or the kalavinka (a mythical
Indian bird) do not compare in beauty with the song of the shy canyon
wren.

Quietly I move across the room and out the open door to see if I can
catch a glimpse of the bird.  I don't have long to wait.  The wren calls
again, softly, a shimmering waterfall of crystal-clear notes.  I trace
the call to the source under the wooden steps that lead from the kitchen
patio up to the driveway above the house.  The wren must have built a
nest right here under the steps.  What a good omen!
The sound of the kettle of water simmering on the stove calls me to the kitchen.
.start
"I hear you, kettle.  You, too, have a beautiful song.  You, too, preach the dharma that
can never be put into words."  I make myself a cup of coffee and take it outside.  I sit
down on the old wooden bench in the little kitchen patio.  The begonias look dry.  The
chrysanthemums need pinching back, and the dead nasturtium blossoms should be picked.
When I'm finished with my coffee, I'll put away my typewriter for the day.  My unfinished
paragraph will polish itself naturally while I water the plants and pull some weeds in
the garden.

After a zen student has fully settled his body into the position of zazen, he is in a
position to settle his mind.  Our thinking mind is used to keeping itself very busy.
It prides itself on its ability to work day and night.  But actually, our thinking
mind has a problem.  It doesn't know how to relax.  The practice of zazen is a time
when we allow the thinking mind to come to a well-needed rest.  Only after the
thinking mind has settled down in the center of our existence will we be in a position
to resume our original nature.

A monk asked a Zen master, "What is zen?"  The master replied, "I eat when I eat, and
I sleep when I sleep."  The monk asked, "Isn't that what everyone does?"  The master
replied, "Not at all.  When most people eat, they think of other things; and when most
people sleep, they dream of other places."  The practice of zazen encourages a person
to put his whole body and mind where it belongs, in the actual physical reality of the
moment, rather than allowing the mind to drift away into some other time or place.
When the mind is allowed to wander away form the body, even for just a few minutes or
just a few inches, the body and mind are split, and this division, if prolonged, tends
to cause internal conflicts.  When internal conflicts are projected outside, external
problems are created.

Before we begin the practice of zazen, it is almost impossible to realize that the
biggest source of human suffering could be such a simple thing as the habit of letting
our mind wander away from its home.  The conflict, suffering, and turmoil caused by
the problem of mind and body add confusion to the problem.  Secondary habits, such as
overindulgence in alcohol, drugs, TV, work, or religious fanatacism, are some of the
extras which are often added to the original discontent created by the split between
mind and body.  But underneath all the confusion of the surface symptoms lies the
basic and undetected problem, the mischief created by the thinking faculty.

Before we begin the practice of zazen, we are not aware of how carried away we are
most of the time by our thinking.  The old saying which goes: "A man takes the first
drink; a drink takes the second drink; and the third drink takes the man," is just as
true with thinking as it is with drinking.  The first thought leads to another, and
then another, and another, and before we realize it, several hours have disappeared
from our lives.  Whenever our body is doing one thing and our mind is somewhere else,
we are actually living some imaginary life, and we have missed living that much of our
actual life.  This is why we feel cheated.  Actually, we cheat ourselves.  Living in
some imaginary life can be very intoxicating.  It often seems more interesting than
our real life.  But sooner or later the imaginary life wears off, and then we find
ourselves back in the same old reality again, and we have added something extra to it
-- a splitting headache.

When we live completely in the actual reality of our own life, with our whole body and
mind, it is like drinking milk.  Drinking milk may seem very ordinary compared to
drinking alcohol.  To an alcoholic, milk may even taste like medicine.  But the
aftereffects of drinking milk are very beneficial.  In the same way, when we live
completely in the full reality of our own life, the aftereffects of this way of living
leave us with a sense of physical and mental well-being.  So the practice of zazen is
as natural and as ordinary as drinking milk.  Zazen may be more like drinking
homogenized milk.  For zazen unites or homogenizes all the senses into a harmonious
blend that enables our mind to digest all experiences evenly and efficiently.

When we begin the practice of zazen, it is like joining Thinkers Anonymous.  Before we
take up the practice of zazen, we first have to admit to ourselves that we have
become mentally confused.  Our life may have presented us with a natural koan, a
problem which we are not able to solve by thinking.  At this time it is almost
impossible to see that it is thinking itself that is really our problem.  Western
civilization has conditioned us to put values on different kinds of thinking.  Some
kinds of thinking are considered profitable and other kinds harmful.  Wishful
thinking, fantasizing, daydreaming and imagining are usually looked upon as inferior
forms of thinking; while planning, remembering, reasoning, judging, comparing,
discriminating, reflecting, selecting, or contemplating are believed to be higher
modes of thought.

In the Western countries overindulgence in daydreaming is recognized, by most people,
to be unhealthy.  We say that such a person who fantasizes a great deal of the time
loses touch with reality.  But is is not easy for most Westerners to appreciate the
fact that anyone who overindulges in reasoning, planning, or any other of the "higher"
forms of thought is also liable to lose touch with reality.  Reality is beyond
thinking.  Reality cannot be touched directly by thought.  But only when reality is
touched directly, not only with the body but with the mind as well, is life fully
realized.  The mind that can touch reality directly is the original mind before it is
divided by thought.  The original mind in its unconditioned state is clear, empty and
alert.  It is pure awareness without any distortions produced by thinking.

After we begin the practice of zazen we may make the mistake of trying to eliminate
all our thoughts.  But Thinkers Anonymous, unlike Alcoholic Anonymous, does not
recommend total abstinence.  Overthinking is more like overeating.  It is possible to
abstain totally from drinking alcohol and still live a perfectly normal life.  But we
must eat.  And as long as we live in this world, thoughts will appear in our mind.  It
is only when we have allowed ourselves to be carried away by our thinking process that
we may find it necessary to follow a mental exercise program for a while to get our
mind back in shape.  But here, too, we must be careful.  If we go on a crash diet, or
try to starve our mind, it will only work for a while;  but sooner or later we will go
back to gorging ourselves again.  It isn't the thoughts themselves that create
problems, but the *attachment* to those thoughts.

The way we handle the situation is just to let the thoughts come in and let them go
out without getting attached to their delicious or unpleasant flavors.  Whenever we
discover that our mind is wandering, we learn to lead it gently back home to the
present environment.  In this way our mind will digest all the thoughts that appear in
it, and gradually they'll decrease.  When the occasion arises in which it is
appropriate to put our whole body and mind into thinking (working on some problem
which can be solved by thinking), we will find our thinking faculty much improved in
performance.  Of course, it takes some time before we are able to recognize the kind
of problem that can be solved by thinking, and the kind of problem that can only be
confused by thinking.

Shakespeare said, "There is nothing either good or bad but thinking makes it so."
Because our culture has overemphasized the value of thinking, considering it good, we
must be careful not to overreact and jump to the conclusion that thinking is bad.
Thinking is neither good nor bad.  It is a function of human life, like eating.  If we
are attached to eating, our body suffers physically.  If we are attached to thinking,
our body suffers mentally.  Attachment is created when we think something is either
good or bad.

Zazen is sometimes called mind-fasting.  There is some resemblance between physical
fasting and mind-fasting.  Although I have not fasted physically for a long period of
time, I understand that in the process of fasting there is a period of several days in
which a false hunger is experienced.  Then a period of a week or two (or in some cases
longer) follows in which no hunger is felt.  Finally true hunger is experienced.  Our
ordinary mental activity may be like false hunger.  Right thinking, or true thinking,
may be like true hunger.  The difference between false thinking and true thinking can
be appreciated in the experience of mental fasting or zazen.

If we can imagine Buddha's Noble Eightfold Path as forming a circle, the step of right
thought is next to the step of right meditation.  When we understand right meditation,
we are above to take one more step and return to thinking, not false thinking, but true
thinking.  Right thinking is concentrated, clear, penetrating, and free from selfish
desires.  This kind of thinking does not carry us away from ourself.  It leads us
deeper into our original nature -- into harmony with the whole zen environment.
