                         OVERVIEW OF PROLOG LANGUAGE

1.  What is Prolog?
-------------------

    Prolog is a very high level programming language that is designed to 
    implement logic rules.  The name, Prolog, comes from the French for
    "Programming in Logic."

    Being used mainly for Artificial Intelligence (AI) applications, Prolog is
    not widely used for business or scientific system.  However, it can be used
    as a general purpose programming language, even though it's paradigm is
    not imperative like traditional languages (C, Pascal, FORTRAN, BASIC, etc).

    In a prolog program, one defines a set of facts about objects and the
    relationships between them.  Then one adds rules that tell how to derive
    new facts.  Running a Prolog program is then a matter of looking up facts
    in the database, or inferring them given the facts and the rules.

    Prolog programs tend to run slow, since it is an interpreted, not a 
    compiled language, the inference of new facts may take much time and may
    require substantial backtracking through incorrect chains of logic.

    If you study and understand prepositional logic and/or first order predicate
    logic, then Prolog will be easier to understand.  However, it is so differ-
    ent than traditional languages that it may take a while to "catch on."
    However, most students end up enjoying Prolog because it is so different
    that it is fun and invites them to think of problems in entirely new ways.

    Prolog programs tend to be very short, since most of the actual work of
    computing is done in the system by the "inference engine," which is the
    software that grinds through the facts and rules, spitting out new facts
    as it applies a logic method to the rules you have entered.  Typically,
    programmers speak of finding a solution to a problem, rather than computing
    it.


2.  Which version do we have at Canisius?
-----------------------------------------

    We use a very good, free version of Prolog called C Prolog, version
    1.5.  It is an implementation of the popular Edinburgh Prolog developed
    by Fernando Pereira at the University of Edinburgh.


3.  What is the history of Prolog?
----------------------------------

    Prolog began around 1970 in France by Alain Colmerauer, as a way of
    writing AI programs to prove mathematical theorems.  It used a logic
    rule called resolution and a simplified form of first order predicate
    expressions called Horn clauses.  Early Prolog systems were unacceptably
    slow until D. H. D. Warren implemented Prolog in a clever way that used
    some shortcuts in recursion.

    Then in 1980, the Japanese initiated the famous 5th Generation project to
    capture the future of computing by being the first to build truly intelli-
    gent computers.  They chose Prolog as their language of choice.  Though
    the project fizzled by the mid-80s, Prolog's fame and importance were
    established.


4.  What books are good to read?
--------------------------------

    The standard Prolog text and reference is

          "Programming in Prolog, 3rd edition" by W. F. Clocksin and
          C. S. Mellish, Springer-Verlag, 1987.

    It is extremely readable, has excellent examples, and is relatively
    complete.  Its examples are also in Edinburgh Prolog, which is what
    we use here.
